Philosophy of Perception and Its History
De Quantitate Animae
Evodius' Objection to the Incorporeality of the Soul Refuted

Evodius' Objection

We have been through a long digression concerning how to validly define perception. So long, that it occasions a somewhat ungrateful complaint from Evodius. Though dialectical discussion may be taxing for the student (Evodius, though Augustine's peer, is playing the student's role in the dialogue), it is important to both endure and retain one's concentration if progress is to be made. And given Augustine's Christianized Platonism, intellectual progress is bound up with spiritual progress. 

Let us recall the digression's aim, which is to lay the groundwork for a counterargument to Evoidus' objection to the incorporeal character of the soul. Against Augustine's case for the inextended, hence, incorporeal character of the soul. (If the soul is inextended, then it must be incorporeal since bodies are extended in three dimensions.) Evodius' objection begins with the observation that if he is touched anywhere on his body, he feels it. But how could this be so, Evodius wonders, if the soul is not extended throughout the body? 

A tacit assumption is at work in Evodius' objection. To bring this out, notice that Evodius objection turns on a particular form of tactile perception, sensation by contact. To see what is distinctive about this consider two contrasts. First sensation by contact contrasts with haptic perception. Haptic perception involves the active exploration of the tangible object and draws upon various forms of bodily awareness such as kinaesthesia and proprioception. Haptic perception necessarily involves temporal duration, the time in which the exploratory activity takes place. Sensation by contact, by contrast, is immediate. Sensation by contact also contrasts with distal touch. Distal touch involves sensing the tangible features of an object that is not in direct contact with the perceiver's body. Thus one can feel the rigidity and texture of a rock by poking it with a stick, or feel the wooden frame of through the padding of a Victorian hobby horse. In neither case is the perceiver's body in direct contact with the object of tactile perception. What one feels is the rock, but the stick is in contact with the rock, not the perceiver's body. And what one feels is the wooden frame even though the perceiver's body is not in contact with it but with the padding. Attending only to sensation by contact, and perhaps by regarding it as an exemplary form of perception, can suggest that the principle governing sensation takes a certain a form. Its slogan might be: the be perceptible is to be palpable. The ideas is the perceived object must be in contact with the principle governing sensation. The sensitive soul is the principle governing sensation. When Evodius is touched upon his body he feels it. That means that the principle of his sensation, Evoidus' sensitive soul, must be in contact with what touches his body, if it is to be perceptible. But it is perceptible. And so the sensitive soul, at least, must be extended throughout the body.

Augustine is sensitive to this tacit assumption even though he does not make it explicit. This sensitivity is manifest in a curious shift in example. Whereas Evodius' objection turns on an observation about touch, understood as sensation by contact, Augustine develops his definition of perception with reference to vision, a form of distal perception. The objects of vision must be at a distance from the perceiver's eyes. Augustine's intent is to undermine the tacit assumption driving Evodius to think that the soul must be extended throughout the body if sensation by contact is to be so much as possible.

Augustine's Counterargument

Augustine counterargument begins with a restatement of the refined definition whose validity has been accepted by Evodius and Augustine:

	Perception is what affects the body by itself not being hidden from the soul

From the accepted definition it immediately follows that:

	If one perceives, one's body is acted upon

Moreover, it was earlier agreed that:

	Seeing is a form of perception

But seeing is in some ways a distinctive form of perception. Importantly, it was also agreed that:

	A perceiver sees an object where the perceiver is not

If sight was confined to where the perceiver is at, at best the eye alone could be seen. (And not even the eye, if Aristotle in De Anima is to be believed.) But the objects of sight are located at a distance from the perceiver. So the perceiver sees an object where they are not. 

From these premises a startling conclusion follows. Seeing is a form of perception. If one perceives, one is acted upon. So in seeing one is acted upon. And since what acts upon one when one sees is located where one is not, in seeing one is acted upon where one is not. The conclusion involves attributing to the animate eye a passive power to be affected where it is not. This is a passive power not shared with soulless natural bodies. Inanimate natural bodies can only be acted upon by what is in contact with them. The living eye, part of a whole and healthy animal, is animated by the sensitive soul, and it is a manifestation of the superiority of the soul that it endows the eye that it animates with the passive power to be affected where it is not. The sensitive soul may lack extensive magnitude, but it has in this way great virtual magnitude. This nicely fits the pattern we observed in Augustine's postive argument for the intextended nature of the soul. This involved attributing superior powers to the soul not possessed by extended corporeal things. Thus while corporeal images are limited by the size of the body upon which they are inscribed, the soul's power to recall an image of an object previously seen is not subject to this limitation. Similarly, the soul possesses the power to conceive of incorporeal geometrical abstractions, and since only like may conceive of like, the soul itself must be incorporeal. It thus possesses a power that no corporeal thing may have. The passive power to be affected where one is not conferred by the sensitive soul is similarly a power that no soulless body may possess. Further testimony to the greatness of soul, conceived, not as greatness of extent but greatness of power or virtue.

How does this attribution of a passive power possessed by no corporeal thing bare on Evodius' objection? Recall the tacit assumption behind Evodius' use of sensation by contact, that the object of sensation must be in contact with its principle, that by which one senses. It is just this assumption that drives Evodius conviction that the soul must be extended throughout the body. For only if it were could it be in contact with what touches the body. But if the sensitive soul confers the passive power to be affected where one is not, then there is no need for the sensitive soul to extend throughout the body. The soul need not be where it is affected for this affection to be not hidden from the range of its attention. Though the writing has been on the wall since chapter 23, Evodius is stunned:

	 That conclusion upsets me very much, so much, in fact, that I am completely stunned. I do not know what to answer and I do not know where I am. What shall I say? Shall I say that a bodily experience of which the soul is aware directly is not sensation? What is it, then, if it is not that? Shall I say that the eyes experience [i.e., that the eyes are affected by] nothing when we see? That is most absurd. Shall I say that the eyes experience where they are? But they do not see themselves and nothing is where they are, except themselves. Shall I say that the soul is not more powerful than the eyes, when the soul is the very power of the eyes? Nothing is more unreasonable. Or must this be said, that it is a sign of greater power to experience there where something is than to experience it where it is not? But, if that were true, sight would not be rated higher than the other senses.
	 
The reason that corporeal things lack the passive power to be affected where they are not is because, being corporeal and extended, they are confined to the place where they are. The soul, being inextended and not so confined, may confer this passive power on a body that it animates.

Augustine and Extramission

Augustine is commonly interpreted as an extramission theorist. And while in other works he does legitimately seem  to embrace some form of extramission, it is important to understanding his counterargument to Evodius' objection, that it is not only does not commit Augustine to extramission, but it is inconsistent with the extramission theory. As an example of extramission, consider the view that Thus Nemesius Bishop of Emisa attributes to Hipparchus (a 2nd-century BCE astronomer and geographer):

	Hipparchus says that rays extend from the eyes and with their extremities lay hold on external bodies like the touch of hands… (De natura hominis)

Recall we distinguished four grades of extramissive involvement with a genuine commitment to extramission only being incurred in the fourth and highest grade:

	Four Grades of Extramissive Involvement

	1. Perception, so conceived, must at least centrally involve the activity of the perceiver;
	2. This activity is outer directed---in the case of vision, this outer-directed activity is rectilinear;
	3. This outer-directed activity of the perceiver constitutes, at least in part, their perception;
	4. The is outer-directed activity that constitutes, at least in part, the perception of an object involves something spatially extending to the distal object of perception---in the case of vision, along a rectilinear path---so that at least part of the perceiver is substantially located where the the perceived object is or is, at the very least, contiguous with it.
	
It is only the fourth and highest grade of extramissive involvement that incurs a genuine commitment to extramission. It is only when the outer-directed activity of the perceiver that constitutes, at least in part, their perception of the object is conceived as something spatially extending to the distal object so that it is in contact with that object do we get a genuine commitment to extramission. Moreover, it is only with the fourth grade that the principle governing extramissive perception becomes evident. Perceptual presentation is understood to be at least modelled on if not a form of sensation by contact. Its principle is: to be perceptible is to be palpable. But this was Evodius' tacit assumption in appealing to the sense of touch, and Augustine's counterargument purports to establish that the sensitive soul, being incorporal is subject to no such limitation. The soul, being inextended and corporeal is in no place, and so need not be placed so as to be in contact with what it perceives. Properly understood, Augustine's counterargument is inconsistent with the principle driving the extramission theory, to be perceptible is to be palpable.

The Division of Animate Beings

Augustine's negative and positive arguments for the incorporeality of the soul have been given, and Evodius object has been dealt with by means of a decisive counterargument. At this point, chapter 31, Evodius presents a further difficulty though one that neither Evodius nor Augustine regard as decisive. The difficulty concerns the division of animate beings, such as pulling a tail of a lizard, or splitting a worm in two.

Consider first a boy pulling the tail off a lizard. Evodius observes that it can sometimes happen that the tail continues to move when it is separated from the lizard's body. How could this be unless the soul was divided along with the body? If this movement is inexplicable except when in the presence of the animating soul, then the case would seem to constitute an argument for the divisibility of the soul and hence its extended character. Augustine, however, denies that the movement of the separated tail could only be explained by the presence of a divided soul. Instead he offers an alternative explanation for the tail's movement. Bodies are composed of elements. Augustine accepts the Empedoclean scheme of the four elements, earth, air, water, and fire. A body composed of earth and water may retain, in addition, fire and air thanks to the presence of an animating soul that unites these elements in a vital mixture. When the tail is separated, the soul departs from it and with it the fire and air that the soul united with the earth and water in a vital mixture begins to escape. And it is the vibrations of the escaping fire and air that cause the observed movements of the separated tail. Augustine's alternative explanation is admittedly speculative, but if adequate, it would suffice to dispense with the present difficulty. One important aspect of it was, however, widely accepted in antiquity, that the soul that animates the body determines its unity and cohesive integration of its parts. As a consequence of this the body decomposes as the soul departs.

Unfortunately, the challenge posed by the second example can not be accommodated in this way. When the tail is separated from the lizard, the lizard lives on while the soul departs from the divided part. The second example, however, involves the division of a worm or centipede where each part of the divided animal continues to live on. Since each divided part lives on, the explanation in terms of elements that escape as the soul departs is inapplicable. In this case, we began with one animal, the worm, and presumably one soul. After the animal is divided each divided part lives on. But insofar as each part continues to live, and the soul is the principle of life, then it can seem as if the animal's soul was divided along with its body. For otherwise what could explain how the divided parts are capable of independent movement and sensation? 

The proper explanation of the movement and sensation of the divided parts of the worm remains obscure. Augustine does not, in fact, propose an alternative explanation to the divisibility of the soul. Despite an adequate alternative explanation not being given, Augustine insists that the phenomenon should not shake our faith in the conclusions already reached. The divided worm remains an unsolved question. 

Lucifer

Though Augustine has no alternative explanation for the motion and sensation of the divided worm, he does offer a linguistic analogy for how the soul can remain undivided and yet the parts continue to live on.

Augustine begins by enforcing the use mention distinction. And it is good that he does because Evodius does not immediately catch on. Specifically, Augustine distinguishes between the sound of a word and what that sound means. A word is a sound with a meaning just as a human is a body with a rational soul. Just as the thought of the soul precedes its use of the body, the meaning of the word precedes its sound in the thought of the speaker. And just as a body is divisible, the sound of a word is divisible. The sound of the Latin word for the sun, sol, is divisible into the sounds of its letters, s, o, and l. However, whereas the division a body is a spatial, the division of a sound is temporal. Whereas bodies are spatially extended, sounds are temporally extended. Just as the soul of the extended and divisible body is itself indivisible, the meaning of the divisible sounds of a word is itself indivisible. And as the indivisible nature of the soul explains what unity and cohesion the living body possesses, the indivisible nature of its meaning explains how the letters are united in a word. Just as the division of an animate body can result in death, the division of a meaningful word can result a loss of a word's meaning. Neither s, nor o, nor l means what sol means. 

So the meaning of a word is the word's soul and its sound is its body. And just as some animate bodies may divide and their parts live on, so the sounds of some words may divide and yet remain meaningful. Augustine's example is Lucifer which, in Latin, designates the morning star. Suppose the sounds of that word are divided into Luci and fer. Luci in Latin means light and fer means bearing. So just as the parts of the divided worm live on independently of one another, luci and fer mean something independently of one another. And this is so despite the meaning of Lucifer remaining indivisible.

This is a cute analogy. The principle difficulty with it concerns the relation between Lucifer's meaning and the meanings of luci and fer. If the meaning (=soul) of Lucifer does not divide into the meanings (=souls) of luci and fer, then where do these meanings (=souls) come from. This is part of the remaining surd of the divided worm. Where do the souls that animate the parts of divided worm fome from if the undivided worm's soul is itself undivided? Augustine seems to be sensitive to the limitations of the analogy since he warns against taking it too seriously. 


