De Quantitate Animae
Perception

The Passive and the Active

Augustine's theorizing about perception is structured around two themes. First, perception involves its object acting upon the perceiver's body, in particular, the relevant sense organ. Second, perception is a psychological activity distinct from its object's effect upon the sense organ. How are they related?

It can seem hard to understand how exactly they are related. After all, the first involves the passive reception of an effect from without, while the other involves an activity directed outwards. And it can be puzzling how, exactly, the active and passive elements of perception combine.

(In the background is Aristotle's distinction between kinesis and energeia. Kinesis literally translates as motion but Aristotle has in mind a more general notion of change. It is a modification passively received from without by being acted upon. It is thus an affection. Energeia, on the other hand is no modification or affection but rather an activity. Most late Platonists accept Aristotle's distinction, though not always as Aristotle understands it, and some, such as Imablichus, ungeneroulsy deny the attribution. Augustine himself adheres to some form of the distinction and may have picked it up from reading the books of certain Platonists.)

So consider the following puzzle. Though not explicitly considered by Augustine, Augustine's reflection on perception usefully sheds light upon it.

Consider Evodius perceiving Augustine. Augustine appears bearded in Evodius' perceptual experience because Augustine was bearded prior to so appearing. And Augustine being bearded is part of what causes Augustine to so appear. This observation is perhaps the source of the long tradition of thinking of perception as a passive capacity. It is plausible, at the very least, that it is a materially necessary condition on a subject perceiving an object that the relevant sensory organs of the subject be acted upon, whether mediately or immediately, by that object. Thus Augustine must act upon Evodius' eyes if Evodius is to see Augustine

Evodius sees Augustine. Augustine acts upon Evodius' eyes. And this is part of the natural history of Evodius' seeing. Not only must Evodius' eyes be acted upon by Augustine, but seeing Augustine is an experience that Evodius undergoes. Even though seeing Augustine is an experience that Evodius undergoes as a result of Augustine acting upon his eyes, Evodius' seeing of Augustine is not something done to Evodius by Augustine. It is Evodius that sees Augustine. It is Evodius, and not Augustine, that sees Augustine. Even acknowledging the passive elements in the natural history and phenomenology of Evodius' perception (that the Augustine is the cause of Evodius seeing him and that Evodius seeing Augustine is an experience that Evodius undergoes), there is a residual active element in Evodius' seeing. Augustine may make himself seen, but Evodius' seeing of the Augustine is activity properly attributed to Evodius and not Augustine.

Classical and Hellenistic Background

Classical reasoning about perception can usefully be seen as structured around the Timaeus 45b–d account of vision. Fire that gives light but does not burn emanates from the eye in a compressed stream. Since it is similar to it, the fiery emanation unites with the external light to constitute a continuous unity that connects the eye with the perceived object. Since it is a continuous unity, the compound of fiery emanation and external light passes on the motion of the object of perception through the body to the soul. The compound body is conceived as an instrument for the visual power of perception at a distance.

Aristotle's postulation of the illuminated transparent as the medium of sight can be seen as a reaction to the Timaeus account. On the Timaeus account, the eyes emission of a fiery substance contributes to the creation of a novel medium, the compound body of emanated fire and light. It is a medium in the sense of being a causal mediator. The distal visible object acts upon the eyes by the medium, a continuous unity, conveying that activity. Aristotle's insight was that there was no need to postulate a novel medium. The illuminated transparent, such as air illuminated by daylight, is an already existing continuous unity which can convey the activity of distal visible objects.

The Stoics had a complicated account of perception. However, that account was driven by an analogy. According to Alexander of Aphrodisas, the Stoics compared the power to see distant objects with a blind man's stick. (Later, Descartes, in the Dioptrics, will revive this Stoic analogy but will put it to a distinctly modern use.) The stick analogy picks up on a formal feature that is preserved, as well, on the Peripatetic account. The stick, like the compound of emanated fire and light and the illuminated transparent, is a continous unity. This formal feature makes a difference to how these thinkers are thinking about the causal transaction. So consider poking something with a stick. It is absurd to suppose that the poke propogates through the stick to the thing poked. Rather, the stick acts upon the thing by poking it as a continuous unity. So we are still far from the more familiar causal model of of light waves propagating from a surface from which they were reflected. 

Causation and Contiguity

The three accounts we sketched, the Platonic, Peripatetic, and Stoic, each assume that causal activity requires contact. If action at a distance were possible, then the postulation of a medium, novel or no, would be unnecessary to transmit causal influence. Some late Platonist thinkers (Plotinus, Porphyry, Proclus) accept action at a distance and so eschew the postulation of a medium and the Stoic stick analogy. Augustine's view is mixed. With respect to soulless natural bodies, causation requires contact. But thanks to the superior power of the soul, bodies animated by the presence of the soul are not so restricted. So there is one causal order for soulless natural bodies and another for those animated by the presence of the soul. And this is further testimony to the greatness of the soul (understood as virtual magnitude).

Extramission

Aristotle's account of perception is regarded as paradigmatic of an intromissionist conception of perception. It is intromissionist since perception involves the passive receipt of the mediated effect of the perceived object. Extramissionist theories, however, stress outward directed activity, often described as the emission of visual rays. Euclid in his optics had a theory of this sort (though the axioms governing visual rays are exclusively concerned with their geometrical properties as opposed to their psychological interpretation.) The Timaeus account of vision is often cited as an extramission theory since it involves the emission of a fiery substance. But the eye's extramissive activity is merely a precondition for the passive reception of the object of perception's influence. In a way, extramissive accounts of vision can seem to rely on touch as a paradigmatic conception of perception. Suppose causation requires contact. Then, insofar as perception involves the sense organs being acted upon, the distal senses, such as vision, pose a problem. We saw Plato and Aristotle resolve this problem by the postulation of an intervening medium. The extramission theory resolves this problem in a different way, with the perceiver, in some sense, reaching out and grabbing the distal object.

Most commentators regard Augustine as endorsing an extramission view. And indeed in many works he appears to do so. However, with respect to DQA, far from endorsing an extramission view, Augustine argues against it.

The failure to appreciate this is really a failure to be clear about what, exactly, is involved in extramission. It is useful in this regard to distinguish different grades of extramissive involvement. It is only the fourth and highest grade that incurs a genuine commitment to extramission:

	1. Perception, so conceived, must at least centrally involve the activity of the perceiver;
	2. This activity is outer directed---in the case of vision, this outer-directed activity is rectilinear;
	3. This outer-directed activity of the perceiver constitutes, at least in part, their perception;
	4. The is outer-directed activity that constitutes, at least in part, the perception of an object involves something spatially extending to the distal object of perception---in the case of vision, along a rectilinear path---so that at least part of the perceiver is substantially located where the the perceived object is or is, at the very least, contiguous with it.


The first two grades, considered in and of themselves, are insufficient for extramission. Indeed, they might reasonably be taken to jointly describe looking. It is not implausible to think that in order to visually perceive an external scene, the perceiver must look at that scene, where looking involves directing one's visual awareness to that scene. Looking, so conceived, is a outer-directed activity of the perceiver that is rectilinear. It determines a line of sight. Plausibly though it may be, the principle---to see, one must look---is a substantive claim that not all may endorse. And yet it falls short of the extramission theory. Notice that the first two grades jointly capture Augustine's claim when he writes ``Sight extends itself outward and through the eyes darts forth far in every possible direction to light up what we see'' (DQA 23 43). Notice, as well, that in determining lines of sight, the first two grades form a sufficient basis for geometrical optics of the kind developed by Euclid, Hero, and Ptolemy. 

The third grade introduces a further substantive commitment. One may accept the principle that to see, one must look, and yet deny that looking constitutes, even in part, seeing. So the third grade is a further commitment. But even the three grades taken together are insufficient for a commitment to extramission. Contemporary enactivists, for example, such as Noë, accept something like the first three grades, but enactivism is not a species of extramission.

It is only the fourth and highest grade of extramissive involvement that incurs a genuine commitment to extramission. It is only when the outer-directed activity of the perceiver that constitutes, at least in part, their perception of the object is conceived as something spatially extending to the distal object so that it is in contact with that object do we get a genuine commitment to extramission. Moreover, it is only with the fourth grade that the principle governing extramissive perception becomes evident. Perceptual presentation is understood to be at least modelled on if not a form of sensation by contact. Its principle is: to be perceptible is to be palpable.

The Definition

When asked by Augustine what sense perception is, Evodius, good Socratic stooge that he is, merely responds with a list, the Peripatetic five senses---vision, audition, olfaction, taste, and touch. Augustine explains that they are presently seeking a single definition that would encompass all five senses (compare Plato, Theaetetus 145e--147c) and proposes a candidate definition for Evodius to defend or reject. This definition will subsequently be refined, though it will retain its basic form. It is worth, however, discussing the initial formulation of the definition: 

	sensum puto esse non latere animam quod patitur corpus (DQA 23 41)

Augustine's provisional definition comes in two parts: quod patitur corpus describes the object of perception whereas non latere animam describes the soul's relation to that object. 

Consider the soul's relation to the object of perception first. And bracket, for the moment, the significance of Augustine's indirect description of that relation. In describing the object of perception as being not hidden from the soul, Augustine is defining perception, in the first instance, as a mode of awareness. 

What is the significance of Augustine's indirect description of the soul's relation to the object of perception? Why describe the object of sensory awareness as something that is not hidden from the soul? Some have found this worrying. Bourke flatly pronounces Augustine's definition ``unsatisfactory'' on just this basis: ``The persistent use of the negative formula (non latere) indicates Augustine's inability to say positively just what sensation is.'' (Augustine's Quest for Wisdom, 112) And Bourke's judgment is reaffirmed by McMahon:. However, I wonder to what extent Bourke's judgment is fair. If we accept, as seems evident, that Augustine had in mind a mode of awareness, then perhaps to describe the object of perception as not hidden from the soul is, after all, to provide a positive characterization of the sensory awareness afforded by perceptual experience.  

Etienne Gilson thought so:

	His purpose is to make sensation an activity of the soul within the soul itself. This is really the reason why he defines it in such a roundabout way. The phrase ``non latet'' indicates precisely that the soul is a spiritual force, ever watchful and attentive. In order to sense, it does not have to receive anything from the organ that it vivifies; it is enough if the changes undergone by the organs do not escape its notice, and come within the range of its attention. (Etienne Gilson, The Christian Philosophy of Saint Augustine, 63)

The positive characterization that Gilson sees in Augustine's roundabout expression is metaphysically significant. We shall return to its significance in due course. But for now, notice how Gilson understands non latere animam as the soul's attentive vigilance. 

I believe that Gilson was right to see in Augustine's roundabout expression a positive characterization of sensory awareness. Consistent with Gilson's suggestion, though logically independent of it, one might also understand Augustine as claiming that sensory awareness is a mode of disclosure. To describe the object of perception as not hidden from the soul is to understand sensory awareness not only as the soul's attentive vigilance but also as a mode of disclosure---an activity whereby what was previously hidden from the range of its attention is now revealed to the soul.

Consider now Augustine's description of what is not hidden from the soul, the object of sensory awareness. There is a crucial ambiguity in quod patitur corpus. The verb, patior, means to suffer or undergo, to be affected. So a natural understanding of this phrase might be what the body undergoes. So understood, the object of sensory awareness is a bodily affection, the way in which the body is affected. However, quod patitur might also be read as Latin rendering of the Greek ὅ τι πάσχει. So understood, the object of sensory awareness is less a bodily affection than what affects the body. On the former understanding, the object of sensory awareness is internal---it is the perceiver's body being affected in a certain way. On the latter understanding, the object of sensory awareness is external, at least if we rule out cases of auto-affection---it is what affects the body from without. 

Understanding quod patitur corpus as what affects the body better coheres with Augustine's own examples of the objects of perception in DQA. The objects of vision, for example, are external bodies located at a distance from the perceiver. Thus Augustine sees Evodius, and Evodius sees Augustine, and neither is at the place where the other is. The objects of perception are external to the perceiver's body. In modern parlane, perception is exteroceptive. And this would remain true even if the sensory disclosure of external bodies involves the perceiver's sensory organs being affected, or even the formation of incorporeal images in the soul occasioned by such affections. 

Understanding quod patitur corpus as bodily affection, passio corporis, yields a definition of what is, at best, bodily sensation. It at best characterizes a form of interoceptive awareness. It is only on the understanding of quod patitur corpus as what affects the body that it plausibly yields a definition of perception. Only so understood does the definition characterize a form of exteroceptive awareness. After all, what affects the body, the objects of perception, are external that body, and the objects of visual perception are located at a distance from the perceiver's body.

O'Daly suggests that the ambiguity is intentional and that both sensation and perception involve sensory awareness:

	Augustine may wish to distinguish here between sensation (\emph{passio corporis}) and perception (\emph{non latere animam}), but it is probably truer to say that he is rather thinking of the external source of most sensory stimuli when he speaks of \emph{passio corporis}, and including under awareness (\emph{non latere}) all forms of sensation and perception. (Augustne's Philosophy of Mind)

If perception fundamentally involves the soul's sensory awareness understood as a mode of disclosure, and if the objects not hidden from the soul are external bodies, then the emphasis of the expression quod patitur corpus is on the fact that the soul's sensory awareness of external bodies is mediated by the body's affection. In this way perception contrasts with the understanding. The soul's awareness of the intelligible is not mediated by the body's affection the way that the soul's sensory awareness is.